If the first episode of Telltale’s Batman series introduced us to the different sides of Bruce Wayne - the brutal vigilante, the billionaire socialite, and the soon-to-be World’s Greatest Detective - then Episode Two, titled Children of Arkham, explores how these parts come together. In doing so it delivers some wonderfully shocking moments and sets up an intriguing new adventure for the Dark Knight.

Despite being roughly half an hour shorter than the first episode (which is two hours long) Episode Two surpasses its predecessor Realm of Shadows in terms of character development and storytelling. While the new antagonists, the eponymous Children of Arkham, are an intriguing new foil to the Caped Crusader, they don't appear until late in the episode and won't be truly captivating until more of their plan is revealed in future episodes. As with any good Batman story, it's ultimately the ghosts of Bruce Wayne’s past that make this installment a compelling continuation of the Telltale series. Keeping things vague to avoid too many spoilers, this installment focuses on whether Bruce can accept what may or may not be a disturbing truth about his family, which leads to iconic figures from the Batman lore being shown in very different, much more interesting light.

The way Children of Arkham’s story confounds my expectations of events as a long-time Bat-fan is its most alluring quality. While I still fully expect certain aspects of the Batman canon to exist in this new version of Gotham – Harvey Dent and Selina Kyle are main characters, after all – the alterations to established lore we’ve already seen inspire confidence in Telltale’s ability to offer new takes on DC’s well-known characters and stories. The writers do a stellar job of taking the Bat-truths I hold to be self-evident, crumpling them up, and tossing them into a flaming dumpster in favor of something potentially just as interesting. It’s much easier to empathize with Bruce’s shock, anger, or sorrow since I, too, was left stunned when a familiar character is cast aside, or revealed to be anything but familiar.

The only downside to this is that I feel that if I had no previous knowledge of the Caped Crusader and his gallery of sidekicks and rogues, these moments might fall somewhat flat. The writing is smart and the entire episode avoids the somewhat sluggish pacing of the series’ previous installment, but if you strip away the Batman mythos from the plot, some of its moments become fairly predictable. Telltale is clearly banking on our pre-existing knowledge of BatLore to let the full impact of its story land, but considering that there have been four number-one box office movies in the past decade and some version of him on TV since the early ‘90s, it doesn’t seem unreasonable to assume that we would have a basic understanding of the source material. And if, by some modern miracle one doesn’t have the slightest clue who Bruce Wayne is, the best moments of this episode revolve around his relationships with his friends and family – things that anyone can relate to.

It’s these more intimate moments – and how they affect our larger decisions throughout the episode – that reinforce the idea of Wayne and his alter-ego as one cohesive character, as opposed to two sides to the same coin. Instead, the two personas are reconciled as different tools at one man’s disposal, and we’re given a choice of using either Bruce’s political savvy and personal touch or Batman’s heavy-handed intimidation tactics to uncover the next piece of the puzzle. While we’re only offered one such scenario in this particular episode, that option offers two distinctly different experiences, and each one provides different information depending on how each sequence plays out. As the Dark Knight I bashed down the doors and pummeled some basic information out of my target before security showed up, but Bruce Wayne was able to coax extra helpful contextual details out of his quarry with some old-fashioned, non-violent charm.

When you do choose the vigilante route, however, this episode features some of Telltale’s best action yet, even if it does suffer from the same noticeable framerate drops or audio hiccups that seem to plague the their more intricate cinematic sequences. Still, the QTE sequences are an enjoyable break from conversation, and one bar fight in particular reminded me just how satisfying completing a well-directed quick-time sequence can be.

What’s even more impressive is that while most modern Batman stories lean on the idea that the Dark Knight only wears Bruce Wayne’s persona as a mask to carry on his vigilante crusade under cover of daylight, this episode had me thinking of the man inside the cowl only as “Bruce” rather than Batman – a first in recent memory – and this sentiment carries over into some unexpectedly poignant interactions between Bruce and the supporting cast.

Exploring how the allegations against his family affects his relationship with Alfred, or how the ensuing scandal – and Bruce’s budding infatuation with Selina Kyle – could potentially redefine or ruin his friendship with Harvey Dent, puts all of the focus on Bruce instead of the Bat. Given the hallmark Batman moments that may (or may not, depending on how you play) be yet to come, adding these extra levels of emotional investment makes for a more compelling tale. Even though I’m familiar with how certain events could play out, I’m genuinely eager for the next episode to arrive and continue it’s unique blend of old and new.

The Verdict
The second installment of Telltale's Batman takes all of the solid foundations established by Episode 1, trims most of the fat, and continues to build an engaging Dark Knight story in a unique and uncharted version of the D.C. legend’s universe. Old Bat-fans will get much more out of the unexpected twists and turns than a newcomer, but the relationships Bruce Wayne forms and develops with the people around him appeal equally.